---
layout: clojure
head: Jark
---
h2. Features


The following are some of the salient features of jark. Some of them may not completely work yet as it is still in development. We should have a release shortly.

**1. Remote Clojure REPL**
** REPL commands to modify classpath, inspect, debug and a lot more

**2. Command-line interface to Clojure programs**

* Any clojure function can be called from the command-line if all the arguments to the function are strings. 

{% highlight bash %}
jark NAMESPACE FUNCTION ARGS*
{% endhighlight %}

** All Jark commands output JSON for parsing when passed a `--json` option
** jark --eval CLOJURE-EXPRESSION. --eval takes input from STDIN. For example, any of the following work.

{% highlight bash %}
jark -e "(+ 2 2)"
echo "(+ 2 2)" | jark -e 
jark -e < file.clj
cat file.clj | jark -e
{% endhighlight %}

**3. Scripting**
** Standalone Clojure scripts can be written using the #! operator. 

{% highlight clojure %}
#!/usr/bin/env jark -h HOST -p PORT
(clojure code ...)
{% endhighlight %}

**4. Remote JVM Management**
** Monitor JVM performance `jark vm stat`
** Dynamically add classpath(s) `jark cp add`
** Run on-demand Garbage collection `jark vm gc`
** View thread info `jark thread list`
** View thread stacktrace `jark thread stack <PATTERN>`

**5. Embeddable Server**
 
* Can be embedded in your app/library.

{% highlight clojure %}
;Add [jark/jark-server "0.4-SNAPSHOT"] to project.clj 
(require 'clojure.tools.jark.server)
(clojure.tools.jark.server/start PORT)
{% endhighlight %}

Alternatively, you can add the application-specific jars to classpath and start the server.

{% highlight bash %}
cd your-lein-project
# Add [jark "0.4.3"] to project.clj 
lein deps
jark -cp lib/*:* server start
{% endhighlight %}

**6. Plugins**
** Server-side plugin system. 
** All plugins are written in Clojure

{% highlight bash %}
jark plugin list
=> ns
   cp
   vm
   swank
{% endhighlight %}
